# Chapter 10

## Commands

- `ps` - Report a snapshot of current processes.
- `top` - Display tasks.
- `jobs` - List active jobs.
- `bg` - Place a job in the background.
- `fg` - Place a job in the foreground.
- `kill` - Send a signal to a process.
- `killall` - Kill processes by name.
- `shutdown` - Shut down or reboot the system

## How a Process Works

When a system starts up, the kernel initiates a few of its own activities as processes and launches a program called **init**. **init**, in turn, runs a series of **shell scripts** (located in **/etc**) called **init** scripts, which start all the system services. Many of these services are implemented as **daemon programs**, programs that just sit in the background and do their thing without having any user interface. So even if we are not logged in, the system is at least a little busy performing routine stuff.

The fact that a program can launch other programs is expressed in the process scheme as a parent process producing a child process.

The kernel maintains information about each process to help keep things organized. For example, each process is assigned a number called a **process ID** (PID). **PIDs** are assigned in ascending order, with **init** always getting **PID 1**. The kernel also keeps track of the memory assigned to each process, as well as the processes readiness to resume execution. Like files, processes also have owners and user IDs, effective user IDs, and so on.

### ps

```bash
himanshu in ~: ps
    PID TTY          TIME CMD
   6604 pts/3    00:00:00 bash
  18885 pts/3    00:00:00 ps
```

To view currently up processes. **TTY** is short for **teletype** and refers to the **controlling terminal for the process**. The **TIME** field is the amount of **CPU** time consumed by the process.

Adding the `x` option (note that there is no leading dash) tells `ps` to show all of our processes regardless of what terminal (if any) they are controlled by. The presence of a `?` in the TTY column indicates no controlling terminal.

### ps x

```bash
himanshu in ~: ps x
    PID TTY      STAT   TIME COMMAND
   2044 ?        Ss     0:00 /lib/systemd/systemd --user
   2045 ?        S      0:00 (sd-pam)
   2050 ?        S<sl   0:04 /usr/bin/pulseaudio --daemonize=no --log-target=journal
   2052 ?        SNsl   0:00 /usr/libexec/tracker-miner-fs
   2055 ?        Ss     0:01 /usr/bin/dbus-daemon --session --address=systemd: --nofork --nopidfile --systemd-activation --syslog-only
   2071 ?        Ssl    0:00 /usr/libexec/gvfsd
```

A new column titled **STAT** has been added to the output. **STAT** is short for **state** and reveals the **current status** of the process.

#### Process State

- `R` Running. The process is running or ready to run.

- `S` Sleeping. The process is not running; rather, it is waiting for an event, such as a keystroke or network packet.

- `D` Uninterruptible sleep. Process is waiting for I/O such as a disk drive.

- `T` Stopped. Process has been instructed to stop (more on this later).

- `Z` A defunct or “zombie” process. This is a child process that has terminated but has not been cleaned up by its parent.

- `<` A high-priority process. It’s possible to grant more importance to a process, giving it more time on the CPU. This property of a process is called niceness. A process with high priority is said to be less nice because it’s taking more of the CPU’s time, which leaves less for everybody else.

- `N` A low-priority process. A process with low priority (a nice process)
will get processor time only after other processes with higher priority
have been serviced.

Another popular set of options is `aux`. This set of options displays the processes belonging to every user.

### ps aux

```bash
himanshu in ~: ps aux
USER         PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root           1  0.0  0.1 170520 12936 ?        Ss   09:13   0:03 /sbin/init splash
root           2  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    09:13   0:00 [kthreadd]
root           3  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        I<   09:13   0:00 [rcu_gp]
root           4  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        I<   09:13   0:00 [rcu_par_gp]
```

- `USER` or `User ID`. This is the owner of the process.

- `%CPU` CPU usage as a percent.

- `%MEM` Memory usage as a percent.

- `VSZ` Virtual memory size.

- `RSS` Resident Set Size. The amount of physical memory (RAM) the process is using in kilobytes.

- `START` Time when the process started. For values over 24 hours, a date is used.

#### Viewing Processes Dynamically with top

ps command provides only a snapshot of the machine’s state at the moment the `ps` command is executed. To see a more dynamic view of the machine’s activity, we
use the top command:

```bash
top - 11:38:03 up  2:24,  1 user,  load average: 0.56, 0.33, 0.36
Tasks: 243 total,   1 running, 242 sleeping,   0 stopped,   0 zombie
%Cpu(s):  3.5 us,  1.2 sy,  0.0 ni, 94.5 id,  0.8 wa,  0.0 hi,  0.0 si,  0.0 st
MiB Mem :   7741.8 total,   2574.3 free,   1451.7 used,   3715.7 buff/cache
MiB Swap:   2048.0 total,   2048.0 free,      0.0 used.   5642.2 avail Mem 

    PID USER      PR  NI    VIRT    RES    SHR S  %CPU  %MEM     TIME+ COMMAND
   2327 himanshu  20   0 4301824 282360 101732 S   6.3   3.6   4:00.94 gnome-shell
   2132 himanshu  20   0  877136  83420  50968 S   5.6   1.1   2:56.53 Xorg
   6585 himanshu  20   0  819440  53700  39248 S   4.0   0.7   0:14.18 gnome-terminal-
   3442 himanshu  20   0 2368100 167524  99960 S   1.0   2.1   3:18.25 FoxitReader
  14598 himanshu  20   0 4579856 149352  58620 S   0.7   1.9   0:31.95 code
```

The `top` display consists of two parts: a **system summary** at the top of the display, followed by **a table of processes sorted by CPU activity**.

##### top Information Fields

###### Row 1

- `top`: Name of the program.

- `14:59:20`: Current time of day.

- `up 2:24`: This is called uptime. It is the amount of time since the machine was last booted. In this example, the system has been up for 2½ hours.

- `1 users`: One users are logged in.

- `load average`: Load average refers to the number of processes that are waiting to run; that is, the number of processes that are in a runnable state and are sharing the CPU. Three values are shown, each for a different period of time. The first is the average for the last 60 seconds, the next the previous 5 minutes,
and finally the previous 15 minutes. Values under 1.0 indicate that the machine is not busy.

###### Row 2

- `Tasks`: This summarizes the number of processes and their various process states.

- `0.7%us`: 0.7% of the CPU is being used for user processes. This means processes outside of the kernel itself.

- `1.0%sy` 1.0% of the CPU is being used for system (kernel) processes.

- `0.0%ni` 0.0% of the CPU is being used by nice (low-priority) processes.

- `98.3%id` 98.3% of the CPU is idle.

- `0.0%wa` 0.0% of the CPU is waiting for I/O.

###### Row 3

- `Mem`: Shows how physical RAM is being used.

###### Row 4

- `Swap`: Shows how swap space (virtual memory) is being used.

## Controlling Processes

```bash
himanshu in ~: xlogo
```

Simply displays a resizable window containing the X logo. If not present try to use `gedit`.

### Putting a Process in the Background

Think of the terminal as having a **foreground** (with stuff visible on the surface, like the shell prompt) and a **background** (with hidden stuff below the
surface). To launch a program so that it is immediately placed in the background, we follow the command with an ampersand character `&`.

```bash
himanshu in ~: xlogo &
[1] 21788
```

**xlogo** window appeared and the shell prompt returned, but some funny numbers were printed too. This message is part of a shell feature called **job control**. With this message, the shell is telling us that we have started job number [1] and that it has **PID 21788**. If we run `ps`, we can see our process:

```bash
himanshu in ~: ps
    PID TTY          TIME CMD
   6604 pts/3    00:00:00 bash
  21788 pts/3    00:00:00 xlogo
  21834 pts/3    00:00:00 ps
```

The shell’s job control facility also gives us a way to list the jobs that have been launched from our terminal.

```bash
himanshu in ~: jobs
[1]+  Running                 xlogo &
```

The results show that we have one job, **numbered 1**, that it is **running**, and that the **command** was `xlogo &`.

### Returning a Process to the Foreground

A process in the background is immune from keyboard input, including any attempt to interrupt it with a **CTRL-C**. To return a process to the **foreground**, use the `fg` command.

The command `fg` followed by a **percent sign** `%` and the **job number** (called a jobspec) does the trick. If we have only one background job, the jobspec is
optional. To terminate xlogo, type CTRL-C.

```bash
himanshu in ~: fg %1
xlogo
^C
```

### Stopping (Pausing) a Process

Sometimes we’ll want to **stop** a process without terminating it. This is often
done to allow a **foreground process** to be moved to the **background**. To stop
a foreground process, type `CTRL-Z` while process is in foreground.

```bash
himanshu in ~: xlogo
^Z
[1]+  Stopped                 xlogo
himanshu in ~: jobs
[1]+  Stopped                 xlogo
himanshu in ~: fg %1  # bring to foreground
xlogo
^Z
[1]+  Stopped                 xlogo
himanshu in ~: bg %1 # send to background
[1]+ xlogo &
himanshu in ~: jobs
[1]+  Running                 xlogo &
```

After stopping `xlogo`, we can verify that the program has stopped by attempting to resize the `xlogo` window. We will see that it appears quite dead.

By launching a program from the command line, you might be able to see error messages that would be invisible if the program were launched graphically. Sometimes, a program will fail to start up when launched from the graphical menu. By launching it from the command line instead, we may see an error message that will reveal the problem. Also, some graphical programs have many interesting and useful command-line options.

## Signals

The `kill` command is used to “kill” (terminate) processes. This allows us to
end the execution of a program that is behaving badly or otherwise refuses to terminate on its own:

```bash
himanshu in ~: jobs
[1]+  Running                 xlogo &
himanshu in ~: ps
    PID TTY          TIME CMD
   6604 pts/3    00:00:00 bash
  22221 pts/3    00:00:00 xlogo
  22508 pts/3    00:00:00 ps
himanshu in ~: kill 22221
himanshu in ~: ps
    PID TTY          TIME CMD
   6604 pts/3    00:00:00 bash
  22511 pts/3    00:00:00 ps
[1]+  Terminated              xlogo
himanshu in ~: jobs
himanshu in ~: 
```

We had xlogo already running (check `jobs`) then we get it's **PID** using `ps`. Now we can kill any process using it's **PID** also we can check if it's terminated using `ps` or `jobs` again. We could also have specified the process using a **jobspec** (for example, %1) instead of a PID.

another way to get PID `pidof <process name>`

```bash
himanshu in ~: pidof xlogo
23207
```

While this is all very straightforward, there is more to it. The kill command doesn’t exactly “kill” processes; rather it sends them signals. Signals are one of several ways that the operating system communicates with programs. We have already seen signals in action with the use of `CTRL-C` and `CTRL-Z`. When the terminal receives one of these keystrokes, it sends a signal to the program in the foreground. In the case of CTRL-C, a signal called `INT` (Interrupt) is sent; with `CTRL-Z`, a signal called TSTP (Terminal Stop) is sent. Programs, in turn, “listen” for signals and may act upon them as they are received. The fact that a program can listen and act upon signals allows it to do things like save work in progress when it is sent a termination signal.

### Sending Signals to Processes with kill

The most common syntax for the kill command looks like this.

`kill [-signal] PID...`

If no signal is specified on the command line, then the `TERM` (Terminate) signal is sent by default. The kill command is most often used to send the signals shown.

- `HUP` flag: `-1` **Hang up**.  

    The signal is used to indicate to programs that the controlling terminal has “hung up.” The effect of this signal can be demonstrated by closing a terminal session. The foreground program running on the terminal will be sent the signal and will terminate. This signal is also used by many daemon programs to cause a reinitialization. This means that when a daemon is sent this signal, it will restart and reread its configuration file. The Apache web server is an example of a daemon that uses the HUP signal in this way.

- `INT` flag: `-2` **Interrupt**.

    Performs the same function as the `CTRL-C` key sent from the terminal. It will usually terminate a program.

- `KILL` flag: `-9` **Kill**.

    Whereas programs may choose to handle signals sent to them in different ways, including by ignoring them altogether, the KILL signal is never actually sent to the target program. Rather, the kernel immediately terminates the process. When a process is terminated in this manner, it is given no opportunity to “clean up” after itself or save its work. For this reason, the KILL signal should be used only as a last resort when other termination signals fail.

- `TERM` flag: `-15` **Terminate**.

    This is the default signal sent by the kill command. If a program is still “alive” enough to receive signals, it will terminate.

- `CONT` flag: `-18` **Continue**.

    This will restore a process after a STOP signal.

- `STOP` flag: `-19` **Stop**.

    This signal causes a process to pause without terminating. Like the KILL signal, it is not sent to the target process, and thus it cannot be ignored.

Let’s try out the kill command

```bash
himanshu in ~: xlogo &
[1] 23783
himanshu in ~: jobs
[1]+  Running                 xlogo &
himanshu in ~: kill -1 %1
[1]+  Hangup                  xlogo
```

We can also use `kill -1 23783`

```bash
himanshu in ~: xlogo &
[1] 24444
himanshu in ~: kill -HUP 24444
himanshu in ~: 
[1]+  Hangup                  xlogo
```

The xlogo program terminates, and the shell indicates that the background process has received a hangup signal. You may need to press the ENTER key a couple of times before you see the message. Note that signals may be specified either by number or by name, including the name prefixed with the letters SIG:

```bash
himanshu in ~: xlogo &          # start process in bg
[1] 24308
himanshu in ~: kill -19 %1      # stop here same as CTRL-Z
[1]+  Stopped                 xlogo
himanshu in ~: kill -18 %1      # resume job from stop to running
himanshu in ~: jobs
[1]+  Running                 xlogo &
himanshu in ~: kill -2 %1       # interrup same as CTRL-C
himanshu in ~: 
[1]+  Interrupt               xlogo
```

Processes, like files, have owners, and you must be the owner of a process (or the superuser) in order to send it signals with `kill`.

### Sending Signals to Multiple Processes with killall

It’s also possible to send signals to multiple processes matching a specified
program or username by using the `killall` command. Here is the syntax:

```bash
killall [-u user] [-signal] name...
```

Remember, as with kill, you must have superuser privileges to send signals to processes that do not belong to you.

```bash
himanshu in ~: xlogo &
[1] 24531
himanshu in ~: xlogo &
[2] 24532
himanshu in ~: xlogo &
[3] 24533
himanshu in ~: killall xlogo
himanshu in ~: 
[1]   Terminated              xlogo
[2]-  Terminated              xlogo
[3]+  Terminated              xlogo
```

## More Process-Related Commands

### pstree

Outputs a process list arranged in a tree-like pattern showing the parent/child relationships between processes

```bash
himanshu in ~: pstree
systemd─┬─ModemManager───2*[{ModemManager}]
        ├─NetworkManager───2*[{NetworkManager}]
        ├─accounts-daemon───2*[{accounts-daemon}]
        ├─acpid
        ├─anydesk───3*[{anydesk}]
        ├─apache2─┬─apache2───27*[{apache2}]
        │         └─2*[apache2───26*[{apache2}]]
        ├─avahi-daemon───avahi-daemon
        ├─bluetoothd

```

### vmstat

Outputs a snapshot of system resource usage including memory, swap, and disk I/O. To see a continuous display, follow the command with a time delay (in seconds) for updates (e.g., vmstat 5). Terminate the output with CTRL-C

```bash
himanshu in ~: vmstat 5
procs -----------memory---------- ---swap-- -----io---- -system-- ------cpu-----
 r  b   swpd   free   buff  cache   si   so    bi    bo   in   cs us sy id wa st
 0  0      0 2514708 104664 3745176    0    0    32    40  454  527  5  1 91  3  0
 0  0      0 2515360 104672 3744652    0    0     0    10  404  622  1  0 99  0  0
 0  0      0 2517824 104672 3744660    0    0     0     0  377  607  1  0 98  1  0
```
