# Chaper 6

## Commands

1. `cat` Concatenate files.
2. `sort` Sort lines of text.
3. `uniq` Report or omit repeated lines.
4. `wc` Print newline, word, and byte counts for each file.
5. `grep` Print lines matching a pattern.
6. `head` Output the first part of a file.
7. `tail` Output the last part of a file.
8. `tee` Read from standard input and write to standard output and files

## Standard Input, Output, and Error

programs such as `ls` actually send their results to a special file called **standard output** (often expressed as `stdout`) and their status messages to another file called **standard error** (`stderr`). By default, both standard output and standard error are linked to the screen and not saved into a disk file. In addition, many programs take input from a facility called **standard input** (`stdin`), which is, by default, attached to the keyboard.

### Redirecting Standard Output

I/O redirection allows us to redefine where standard output goes. To redirect standard output to another file instead of the screen, we use the `>`
redirection operator followed by the name of the file.

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls
dir1  dir2  First.class  first.java  fun-hard
himanshu in practice: ls > output.txt
himanshu in practice: cat output.txt 
dir1
dir2
First.class
first.java
fun-hard
output.txt
```

Now, let’s repeat our redirection test but this time with a twist. We’ll change the name of the directory to one that does not exist.

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls
dir1  dir2  First.class  first.java  fun-hard  output.txt
himanshu in practice: ls dir1
fun-hard
himanshu in practice: ls dir11 > output.txt 
ls: cannot access 'dir11': No such file or directory
himanshu in practice: cat output.txt 
himanshu in practice:
```

But why was the error message displayed on the screen rather than being redirected to the file `output.txt`? Because `ls` program does not send its error messages to **standard output**. Instead, it sends its error messages to **standard error**. Since we redirected only standard output and not standard error, the error message was still sent to the screen.

While our `output.txt` file became empty. This is because, when we redirect output with the `>` redirection operator, the destination file is always rewritten from the beginning. Since our `ls` command generated no results and only an error message, the redirection operation started to rewrite the file and then stopped because of the error, resulting in its truncation.  

To truncate a file (or create a new, empty file) we can use a trick like this

```bash
himanshu in practice: > output.txt 
himanshu in practice: cat output.txt 
himanshu in practice: 
```

To write in appending mode to a file without overwriting previous data use this. Also if a file do not exists it will be created.

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls >> output.txt
```

### Redirecting Standard Error

To redirect standard error we must refer to its **file descriptor**. A program can produce output on any of several numbered file streams. While we have referred to the **first three** of these file streams as **standard input, output, and error**, the shell references them internally as file descriptors **0, 1, and 2**, respectively. The shell provides a notation for redirecting files using the file descriptor number. Since standard error is the same as file descriptor 2, we can redirect standard error with this notation

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls dir11 2> output.txt 
himanshu in practice: cat output.txt 
ls: cannot access 'dir11': No such file or directory
```

The file descriptor 2 is placed immediately before the redirection operator to perform the redirection of standard error.

### Redirecting Standard Output and Standard Error to One File

To do this, we must redirect both standard output and standard error at the same time. There are two ways to do this. First, here is
the traditional way, which works with old versions of the shell.

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls dir1 InvalidDir > output.txt 2>&1
himanshu in practice: cat output.txt 
ls: cannot access 'InvalidDir': No such file or directory
dir1:
fun-hard
```

Using this method, we perform two redirections. First we redirect standard output to the file ls-output.txt, and then we redirect file descriptor
2 (standard error) to file descriptor 1 (standard output) using the notation 2>&1. Note: Notice that the order of the redirections is significant. The redirection of standard error must always occur after redirecting standard output or it doesn’t work.

Recent versions of bash provide a second, more streamlined method for performing this combined redirection:

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls dir1 InvalidDir &> output.txt
himanshu in practice: cat output.txt 
ls: cannot access 'InvalidDir': No such file or directory
dir1:
fun-hard
```

### Redirecting Standard Input

#### cat - Concatenate Files

Reads one or more files and copies them to standard output like so: `cat [file...]`

Since `cat` can accept more than one file as an argument, it can also be used to join files together. Say we have downloaded a large file that
has been split into multiple parts. If the files were named `movie.mpeg.001 movie.mpeg.002 ... movie.mpeg.099`
we could rejoin them with this command:  

`$ cat movie.mpeg.0* > movie.mpeg`

Since wildcards always expand in sorted order, the arguments will be arranged in the correct order.

If `cat` is not given any arguments, it reads from standard input, and since standard input is, by default, attached to the keyboard, it’s waiting
for us to type something.

```bash
himanshu in practice: cat 
hello keyboard input
hello keyboard input
are you felling well?
are you felling well?
^C
```

In the absence of filename arguments, `cat` copies **standard input** to **standard output**, so we see our line of text repeated. We can use this behavior to create short text files.

```bash
himanshu in practice: cat > UserInput.txt
hello ubuntu
How are you?
Well fine!
^C
himanshu in practice: cat UserInput.txt 
hello ubuntu
How are you?
Well fine!
himanshu in practice: 
```

Using the < redirection operator, we change the source of standard input from the keyboard to the file UserInput.txt. This is not particularly useful
compared to passing a filename argument, but it serves to demonstrate using a file as a source of standard input.

```bash
himanshu in practice: cat < UserInput.txt 
hello ubuntu
How are you?
Well fine!
```

## Pipelines

The ability of commands to read data from standard input and send to standard output is utilized by a shell feature called pipelines. Using the pipe
operator `|` (vertical bar), the standard output of one command can be piped into the standard input of another.

```bash
command1 | command2
```

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls | grep .txt
new.txt
output.txt
UserInput.txt
```

### Filters

It is possible to put several commands together into a pipeline. Frequently, the commands used this way are referred to as filters.Imagine we
want to make a combined list of all of the executable programs in `/bin` and `/usr/bin`, put them in sorted order, and then view the list:

`$ ls /bin /usr/bin | sort | less`

Since we specified two directories (/bin and /usr/bin), the output of `ls` would have consisted of two sorted lists, one for each directory. By including sort in our pipeline, we changed the data to produce a single, sorted list.

### uniq - Report or Omit Repeated Lines

The `uniq` command is often used in conjunction with sort. uniq accepts a sorted list of data from either standard input or a single filename argument, removes any duplicates from the list. So, to make sure our list has no duplicates.

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls /bin /usr/bin | sort | uniq | less
```

If we want to see the list of duplicates instead, we add the `-d` option to `uniq` like so:

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls /bin /usr/bin | sort | uniq -d | less
```

### wc - Print Line, Word, and Byte Counts

To display the number of lines, words, and bytes contained in files.

```bash
himanshu in practice: cat UserInput.txt 
hello ubuntu
How are you?
Well fine!
himanshu in practice: wc UserInput.txt 
 3  7 37 UserInput.txt
himanshu in practice: wc UserInput.txt -l
3 UserInput.txt
```

lines, words, and bytes contained in file. `-l` flag reports only number of lines.

To see the number of items we have in our sorted list

```bash
himanshu in practice:  ls /bin /usr/bin | sort | uniq | wc -l
1660
```

### grep - Print Lines Matching a Pattern

`grep` is a powerful program used to find text patterns within files, like this:

```bash
grep pattern [file...]
```

Let’s say we want to find all the files in our list of programs that have the word zip in the name.

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls /bin /usr/bin | sort | uniq | grep zip
bunzip2
funzip
gpg-zip
gunzip
gzip
prezip-bin
unzip
unzipsfx
zip
zipcloak
...
```

`grep: -i`, which causes grep to ignore case when performing the search (normally searches are case sensitive) and `-v`, which tells grep to print only lines that do not match the pattern.

```bash
himanshu in practice: cat UserInput.txt 
hello ubuntu
How are you?
Well fine!
himanshu in practice: grep hello UserInput.txt 
hello ubuntu
himanshu in practice: grep Hello UserInput.txt
himanshu in practice: grep Hello UserInput.txt -i
hello ubuntu
himanshu in practice: grep Hello UserInput.txt -v
hello ubuntu
How are you?
Well fine!
himanshu in practice: grep hello UserInput.txt -v
How are you?
Well fine!
```

### head/tail - Print First/Last Part of Files

The `head` command prints the **first 10 lines** of a file, and the `tail` command prints the **last 10 lines**. By default, both commands print 10 lines of text, but this can be adjusted with the `-n` option:

```bash
himanshu in practice: cat UserInput.txt 
hello ubuntu
How are you?
Well fine!
himanshu in practice: head -n 2 UserInput.txt 
hello ubuntu
How are you?
himanshu in practice: tail -n 2 UserInput.txt 
How are you?
Well fine!
```

can be used in pipeline as well

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls /usr/bin | tail -n 5
zipsplit
zjsdecode
zless
zmore
znew
```

### tee - Read from Stdin and Output to Stdout and Files

`tee` which creates a `T` fitting on our pipe. The `tee` program reads standard input and copies it to both standard output and to one or more files. This is useful for capturing a pipeline’s contents at an intermediate stage of processing.

```bash
himanshu in practice: ls
dir1  dir2  First.class  first.java  fun-hard  UserInput.txt
himanshu in practice: 
himanshu in practice: ls | tee ls.txt | wc -l
7
himanshu in practice: cat ls.txt 
dir1
dir2
First.class
first.java
fun-hard
ls.txt
UserInput.txt
```
