# Troubleshooting

### Missing Quotes
```bash
#!/bin/bash
number=1
if [ $number = 1 ]; then
	echo "Number is equal to 1.
else
	echo "Number is not equal to 1."
fi
```
```
$ trouble
/home/me/bin/trouble: line 10: unexpected EOF while looking for
matching `"'
/home/me/bin/trouble: line 13: syntax error: unexpected end of file
```
bash will continue looking for the closing quote until it finds one, which it does immediately after the second echo command. bash becomes very confused after that, and the syntax of the if command is broken because the fi statement is now inside a quoted (but open) string.

### Missing Or Unexpected Tokens
If we remove the semicolon after the test in the if command.
```bash
#!/bin/bash
# trouble: script to demonstrate common errors
number=1
if [ $number = 1 ] then
	echo "Number is equal to 1."
else
	echo "Number is not equal to 1."
fi
```
```
$ trouble
/home/me/bin/trouble: line 9: syntax error near unexpected token
`else'
/home/me/bin/trouble: line 9: `else'
```
The `[` command takes what follows it as a list of arguments in our case, four arguments: `$number`, `1`, `=`, and `]`. With the semicolon removed, the word `then` is added to the list of arguments, which is syntactically legal. The following `echo` command is legal, too. It’s interpreted as another com
mand in the list of commands that if will evaluate for an exit code. The else is encountered next, but it’s out of place, since the shell recognizes it as a reserved word and not the name of a command, hence the error message.

### Unanticipated Expansions
```bash
#!/bin/bash

# trouble: script to demonstrate common errors

number=

if [ $number = 1 ]; then
	echo "Number is equal to 1."
else
	echo "Number is not equal to 1."
fi
```
```
$ trouble
/home/me/bin/trouble: line 7: [: =: unary operator expected
Number is not equal to 1.
```
We get this rather cryptic error message, followed by the output of the second echo command. The problem is the expansion of the number variable within the test command. When the command `[ $number = 1 ]`
undergoes expansion with number being empty, the result is this `[ = 1 ]` which is invalid and the error is generated.

The = operator is a binary operator (it requires a value on each side), but the first value is missing, so the test command expects a unary operator (such as -z) instead. Further, since the test failed (because of the error), the if command receives a non-zero exit code and acts accordingly, and the second
echo command is executed.

This problem can be corrected by adding quotes around the first argument in the test
command `[ "$number" = 1 ]` after expansion `[ "" = 1 ]` correct number of arguments.

### Defensive Programming
Consider the script
```bash
cd $dir_name
rm *
```
as long as the directory named in the variable, `dir_name`, exists. But what happens if it does not? In that case, the `cd` command fails and the script continues to the next line and deletes the files in the current working directory.
```bash
cd $dir_name && rm *
```
If the `cd` command fails, the `rm` command is not carried out.
This is better, but still leaves open the possibility that the variable, `dir_name`, is unset or empty, which would result in the files in the user’s home directory being deleted.

This could also be avoided by checking to see that dir_name actually contains the name of an existing directory:
```bash
[[ -d $dir_name ]] && cd $dir_name && rm *
```

A even better version
```bash
#!/bin/bash

dir_name="/home/himanshu/HP/temp"

if [[ -d $dir_name ]]; then
	if cd $dir_name; then
		echo rm * # this will print all selected files for deletion
		# rm *	  # uncomment to actually remove all the files
	else
		echo "cannot cd to '$dir_name'" >&2
		exit 1
		fi
else
	echo "no such directory: '$dir_name'" >&2
	exit 1
fi
exit 0
```

### Verifying Input
Input must be carefully screened, to ensure that only valid input is accepted for further processing.
`[[ $REPLY =~ ^[0-3]$ ]]`
return a zero exit status if the string returned by the user is a numeral in the range of zero to three.

### Tracing
`bash` also provides a method of tracing, implemented by the `-x` option and the set command with the `-x` option.
```bash
#!/bin/bash

set -x # Turn on tracing
number=1
if [ $number = 1 ]; then
	echo "Number is equal to 1."
else
	echo "Number is not equal to 1."
fi
set +x # Turn off tracing
```
```
$ bash tracing.sh 
+ number=1
+ '[' 1 = 1 ']'
+ echo 'Number is equal to 1.'
Number is equal to 1.
+ set +x
```
